Docs (#119)
flarelabs-net/vite-plugin-cloudflare: README.md

# `@cloudflare/vite-plugin`

## Intro

The Cloudflare Vite plugin enables a full featured integration between Vite and the Workers runtime.
Your Worker code runs inside [workerd](https://github.com/cloudflare/workerd), matching the production behaviour as closely as possible and providing confidence as you develop and deploy your applications.

### Features

- Provides direct access to Workers runtime APIs and bindings
- Supports Workers Assets, enabling you to build static sites, SPAs and full-stack applications
- Leverages Vite's hot-module reloading for consistently fast updates

> - Supports `vite preview` for previewing your build output in the Workers runtime prior to deployment

Author: We could add some emojis here. Not my area of expertise so suggestions welcome!

> 

Author: It might be a bit wordy to include this here before the Quick Start. Is it not clear that it's included as a dependency to install?

## Contents

- [Quick Start](#quick-start)
- [Tutorial](#tutorial)
- [API](#api)

## Quick Start

### Install the dependencies

```sh
npm install @cloudflare/vite-plugin wrangler --save-dev
```

### Add the plugin to your Vite config

```ts
// vite.config.ts

import { defineConfig } from 'vite';
import { cloudflare } from '@cloudflare/vite-plugin';

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [cloudflare()],
});
```

### Create your Worker config file

```toml
# wrangler.toml

name = "my-worker"
main = "./src/index.ts"
compatibility_date = "2024-12-05"
```

### Create your Worker entry file

```ts
// src/index.ts

export default {
  fetch() {
    return new Response(`Running in ${navigator.userAgent}!`);
  },
};
```

> ## Tutorial

Reviewer: it's not that long, so suggest we keep it inline for now.

In this tutorial, we're going to create a React SPA that can be deployed to Workers Assets.
We'll then add an API Worker that can be accessed from the front-end code.
We will develop, build and preview the application using Vite before finally deploying to Cloudflare.

### Scaffold a Vite project

Let's start by creating a React TypeScript project with Vite.

```sh
npm create vite@latest cloudflare-vite-tutorial -- --template react-ts
```

Open the `cloudflare-vite-tutorial` directory in your editor of choice.

### Add the Cloudflare dependencies

```sh
npm install @cloudflare/vite-plugin wrangler --save-dev
```

### Add the plugin to your Vite config

```ts
// vite.config.ts

import { defineConfig } from 'vite';
import react from '@vitejs/plugin-react';
import { cloudflare } from '@cloudflare/vite-plugin';

export default defineConfig({

>   plugins: [react(), cloudflare()],

Author: See above comment.

});
```

### Create your Worker config file

```toml

> # wrangler.toml

Reviewer 2: I was expecting this too.

assets = {}
```

The `directory` field is not used when configuring assets with Vite.
The `directory` in the output configuration will automatically point to the client build output.

> [!NOTE]
> When using the Cloudflare Vite plugin, the Worker config (e.g. `wrangler.toml`) that you provide is the input configuration file.
> A separate output `wrangler.json` file is created when you run `vite build`.
> This output file is a snapshot of your configuration at the time of the build and is the configuration used for preview and deployment.

### Configure not found handling

If you run `vite dev`, you will see that your app is running.

> If you navigate to a different path, however, you will get a 404 response.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you navigate to a path different to `/`, however, you will get a 404 response.
```
or
```suggestion
If you navigate to a path other than the index one, however, you will get a 404 response.
```

This is because the not found handling is now being handled by the Cloudflare plugin rather than Vite and replicates the production behaviour that is specified in your configuration.
To make all not found requests direct to the `index.html` file, set the value to `single-page-application` in your Worker config.

```toml
# wrangler.toml

assets = { not_found_handling = "single-page-application" }
```

> Now, if you navigate to a different path, you will still see your application.

Reviewer 3: same as above, since we haven't specified what path the user navigates to, different path is a bit ambiguous in my opinion

> For a purely front-end application, you could now proceed to build and deploy your application.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps put in a heading that is something like "Adding an API Worker" or similar.
The next heading being "Add the `@cloudflare/workers-types` dependency and configure TypeScript" felt jarring.

Author: I've changed the heading to 'Configure TypeScript for your Worker code'. Is that OK? Alternatively I could split the tutorial with two sub-headings and knock all the other headings down a level.

We're going to go a step further, however, and add an API Worker.

### Add the `@cloudflare/workers-types` dependency and configure TypeScript

```sh
npm install @cloudflare/workers-types --save-dev
```

```jsonc
// tsconfig.worker.json

{
  "extends": "./tsconfig.node.json",
  "compilerOptions": {
    "tsBuildInfoFile": "./node_modules/.tmp/tsconfig.worker.tsbuildinfo",
    "types": ["@cloudflare/workers-types/2023-07-01", "vite/client"],
  },
  "include": ["api"],
}
```

```jsonc
// tsconfig.json

{
  "files": [],
  "references": [
    { "path": "./tsconfig.app.json" },

>     { "path": "./tsconfig.node.json" },

Reviewer 2: Does the Vite React creation tool generate the `tsconfig.app.json` and `tsconfig.node.json`?
If so, how come it doesn't already include the TypeScript dependency?

Author: It does generate those files and includes the TypeScript dependency. Not quite sure what you mean?

    { "path": "./tsconfig.worker.json" },
  ],
}
```

### Add to your Worker configuration

```toml
# wrangler.toml

name = "api"
main = "./api/index.ts"
compatibility_date = "2024-12-05"
assets = { not_found_handling = "single-page-application", binding = "ASSETS" }
```

The assets `binding` defined here will allow us to access the assets functionality from our Worker.

### Add your API Worker

```ts
// api/index.ts

interface Env {
  ASSETS: Fetcher;
}

export default {
  fetch(request, env) {
    const url = new URL(request.url);

    if (url.pathname.startsWith('/api/')) {
      return Response.json({
        name: 'Cloudflare',
      });
    }

    return env.ASSETS.fetch(request);
  },
} satisfies ExportedHandler<Env>;
```

> The Worker above will be invoked for any not found path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Worker above will be invoked for any request not matching a static asset.
```

It returns a JSON response if the `pathname` starts with `/api/` and otherwise passes the incoming request through to the asset binding.

> This means that for paths that do not start with `/api/`, the `not_found_handling` behaviour defined in the Worker config will be evaluated and the `index.html` file will be returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that for paths that do not start with `/api/`, the `not_found_handling` behaviour defined in the Worker config will be evaluated and the `index.html` file will be returned to enable single page application navigations.
```

          <img src={viteLogo} className="logo" alt="Vite logo" />
        </a>
        <a href="https://react.dev" target="_blank">
          <img src={reactLogo} className="logo react" alt="React logo" />
        </a>
      </div>
      <h1>Vite + React</h1>
      <div className="card">
        <button
          onClick={() => setCount((count) => count + 1)}
          aria-label="increment"
        >
          count is {count}
        </button>
        <p>
          Edit <code>src/App.tsx</code> and save to test HMR
        </p>
      </div>
      <div className="card">
        <button
          onClick={() => {
            fetch('/api/')
              .then((res) => res.json() as Promise<{ name: string }>)
              .then((data) => setName(data.name));
          }}
          aria-label="get-name"
        >
          Name from API is: {name}
        </button>
        <p>
          Edit <code>api/index.ts</code> to change the name
        </p>
      </div>
      <p className="read-the-docs">
        Click on the Vite and React logos to learn more
      </p>
    </>
  );
}

export default App;
```

Now, if you click the button, it will display 'Name from API is: Cloudflare'.

> Try incrementing the counter and then changing the `name` that is returned in `api/index.ts`.

Reviewer: consider being a bit more explicit here, as the instructions are a bit vague and the impact might not be understood, for example (feel free to rephrase):

> Let's now see hot module reloading in action. Try incrementing the counter to initialize application state in the browser. Then edit `api/index.ts` by changing the `name` it returns to `"Cloudflare Workers"`. If you now click the button again, it will display the new `name` while preserving the previously set counter value! You can now iterate on your app quickly without losing any of the UI state in between edits.

If you click the button again, it will display the new value while preserving the counter state.

### Build your application

Run `vite build` to build your application.

If you inspect the `dist` directory, you will see that it contains two subdirectories: `client` and `api`.
The `api` directory contains your Worker code and the output `wrangler.json` configuration.

### Preview your application

Run `vite preview` to validate that your application runs as expected.

> This command will run your build output locally in the Workers runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command will run your production build output locally in the Workers runtime, without HMR or other development support code.
```

### Deploy to Cloudflare

Run `wrangler deploy` to deploy your application to Cloudflare.
This command will automatically use the output `wrangler.json` that was included in the build output.

### Next steps

> In this tutorial, we created an SPA that could be deployed using Workers Assets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we created an SPA that could be deployed using a Worker with Worker Assets.
```

We then added an API Worker that could be accessed from the front-end code.
Possible next steps include:

- Adding a binding to another Cloudflare service such as a [KV namespace](https://developers.cloudflare.com/kv/) or [D1 database](https://developers.cloudflare.com/d1/)
- Expanding the API to include additional routes
- Using a library, such as [tRPC](https://trpc.io/) or [Hono](https://hono.dev/), in your API Worker

## API

### `cloudflare`

The `cloudflare` plugin should be included in the Vite `plugins` array:

```ts
// vite.config.ts

import { defineConfig } from 'vite';

> import { cloudflare } from '@cloudflare/vite-plugin';

Reviewer: are we moving away from the default import?

Author: See other comment about possibly importing a different package. As far as I remember, we never used a default export.

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [cloudflare()],
});
```

It accepts an optional `PluginConfig` parameter.

### `interface PluginConfig`

- `configPath?: string`

  An optional path to your Worker config file.
  By default, a `wrangler.toml`, `wrangler.json` or `wrangler.jsonc` file in the root of your application will be used as the Worker config.

- `viteEnvironment?: { name?: string }`

  Optional Vite environment options.
  By default, the environment name is the Worker name with `-` characters replaced with `_`.
  Setting the name here will override this.

- `persistState?: boolean | { path: string }`

  An optional override for state persistence.
  By default, state is persisted to `.wrangler/state/v3`.

>   A custom `path` can be provided or, alternatively, persistence can be disabled by setting the value to `false`.

Author: I've separated out the `v3` subdirectory so this is clearer.

- `auxiliaryWorkers?: Array<AuxiliaryWorkerConfig>`

  An optional array of auxiliary workers.
  You can use [service bindings](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/runtime-apis/bindings/service-bindings/) to call auxiliary workers from your main Worker.
  During the build, each Worker is output in a separate subdirectory of `dist`.

> [!NOTE]
> When running `wrangler deploy`, only your main (entry) Worker will be deployed.
> If using multiple Workers, it is your responsibility to deploy them individually.
> You can inspect the `dist` directory and then run `wrangler deploy -c path-to-worker-output-config` for each.

### `interface AuxiliaryWorkerConfig`

- `configPath: string`

  A required path to your Worker config file.

- `viteEnvironment?: { name?: string }`

  Optional Vite environment options.
  By default, the environment name is the Worker name with `-` characters replaced with `_`.
  Setting the name here will override this.

## Migrating from `wrangler dev`

> Migrating from `wrangler dev` should be straightforward but there are a few key differences to highlight:

Reviewer: maybe just a reference to install the plugin as mentioned in the quick start above?

# `@cloudflare/vite-plugin`

[Intro](#intro) | [Quick Start](#quick-start) | [Tutorial](#tutorial) | [API](#api) | [Migrating from `wrangler dev`](#migrating-from-wrangler-dev)

## Intro

The Cloudflare Vite plugin enables a full featured integration between Vite and the Workers runtime.
Your Worker code runs inside [workerd](https://github.com/cloudflare/workerd), matching the production behaviour as closely as possible and providing confidence as you develop and deploy your applications.

### Features

- Provides direct access to Workers runtime APIs and bindings
- Supports Workers Assets, enabling you to build static sites, SPAs and full-stack applications
- Leverages Vite's hot module replacement for consistently fast updates
- Supports `vite preview` for previewing your build output in the Workers runtime prior to deployment

> ## Quick Start

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Quick start
```

### Install the dependencies

```sh
npm install @cloudflare/vite-plugin wrangler --save-dev
```

### Add the plugin to your Vite config

```ts
// vite.config.ts

import { defineConfig } from 'vite'
import { cloudflare } from '@cloudflare/vite-plugin'

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [cloudflare()],
})
```

### Create your Worker config file

```toml
# wrangler.toml

name = "my-worker"
compatibility_date = "2024-12-30"
main = "./src/index.ts"
```

### Create your Worker entry file

```ts
// src/index.ts

export default {
  fetch() {
    return new Response(`Running in ${navigator.userAgent}!`)
  },
}
```

You can now develop (`npm run dev`), build (`npm run build`), preview (`npm run preview`) and deploy (`npm exec wrangler deploy`) your application.

## Tutorial

In this tutorial, we're going to create a React SPA that can be deployed as a Worker with Workers Assets.
We'll then add an API Worker that can be accessed from the front-end code.
We will develop, build and preview the application using Vite before finally deploying to Cloudflare.

### Set up and configure the React SPA

#### Scaffold a Vite project

> Let's start by creating a React TypeScript project with Vite.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Start by creating a React TypeScript project with Vite.
```

```sh
npm create vite@latest cloudflare-vite-tutorial -- --template react-ts
```

Open the `cloudflare-vite-tutorial` directory in your editor of choice.

#### Add the Cloudflare dependencies

```sh
npm install @cloudflare/vite-plugin wrangler --save-dev
```

#### Add the plugin to your Vite config

```ts
// vite.config.ts

import { defineConfig } from 'vite'
import react from '@vitejs/plugin-react'
import { cloudflare } from '@cloudflare/vite-plugin'

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [react(), cloudflare()],
})
```

#### Create your Worker config file

```toml
# wrangler.toml

name = "cloudflare-vite-tutorial"
compatibility_date = "2024-12-30"
assets = { not_found_handling = "single-page-application" }
```

> We have set the [`not_found_handling`](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/static-assets/routing/#not_found_handling--404-page--single-page-application--none) value to `single-page-application`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You have set the [`not_found_handling`](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/static-assets/routing/#not_found_handling--404-page--single-page-application--none) value to `single-page-application`.
```
Or "has been set to", if you prefer

This means that all not found requests will serve the `index.html` file.
With the Cloudflare plugin, the `assets` routing configuration is used in place of Vite's default behaviour.
This ensures that your application's routing works the same way while developing and is it does when deployed to production.

Note that the [`directory`](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/static-assets/binding/#directory) field is not used when configuring assets with Vite.
The `directory` in the output configuration will automatically point to the client build output.

> [!NOTE]

> > When using the Cloudflare Vite plugin, the Worker config (e.g. `wrangler.toml`) that you provide is the input configuration file.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> When using the Cloudflare Vite plugin, the Worker config (for example, `wrangler.toml`) that you provide is the input configuration file.
```
Unless you meant "i.e."? In that case, just change it to simply "(wrangler.toml)"

> A separate output `wrangler.json` file is created when you run `vite build`.
> This output file is a snapshot of your configuration at the time of the build and is modified to reference your build artifacts.
> It is the configuration that is used for preview and deployment.

#### Run the development server

Run `npm run dev` to verify that your application is working as expected.

For a purely front-end application, you could now proceed to build (`npm run build`), preview (`npm run preview`) and deploy (`npm exec wrangler deploy`) your application.

> We're going to go a step further, however, and add an API Worker.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, this tutorial will show you how to go a step further and add an API Worker.
```

### Add an API Worker

#### Configure TypeScript for your Worker code

```sh
npm install @cloudflare/workers-types --save-dev
```

```jsonc
// tsconfig.worker.json

{
  "extends": "./tsconfig.node.json",
  "compilerOptions": {
    "tsBuildInfoFile": "./node_modules/.tmp/tsconfig.worker.tsbuildinfo",
    "types": ["@cloudflare/workers-types/2023-07-01", "vite/client"],
  },
  "include": ["api"],
}
```

```jsonc
// tsconfig.json

{
  "files": [],
  "references": [
    { "path": "./tsconfig.app.json" },
    { "path": "./tsconfig.node.json" },
    { "path": "./tsconfig.worker.json" },
  ],
}
```

#### Add to your Worker configuration

```toml
# wrangler.toml

name = "cloudflare-vite-tutorial"
compatibility_date = "2024-12-30"
assets = { not_found_handling = "single-page-application", binding = "ASSETS" }
main = "./api/index.ts"
```

> The assets `binding` defined here will allow us to access the assets functionality from our Worker.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The assets `binding` defined here will allow you to access the assets functionality from your Worker.
```

#### Add your API Worker

```ts
// api/index.ts

interface Env {
  ASSETS: Fetcher
}

export default {
  fetch(request, env) {
    const url = new URL(request.url)

    if (url.pathname.startsWith('/api/')) {
      return Response.json({
        name: 'Cloudflare',
      })
    }

    return env.ASSETS.fetch(request)
  },
} satisfies ExportedHandler<Env>
```

The Worker above will be invoked for any request not matching a static asset.
It returns a JSON response if the `pathname` starts with `/api/` and otherwise passes the incoming request through to the asset binding.
This means that for paths that do not start with `/api/`, the `not_found_handling` behaviour defined in the Worker config will be evaluated and the `index.html` file will be returned, enabling SPA navigations.

#### Call the API from the client

Edit `src/App.tsx` so that it includes an additional button that calls the API and sets some state.

> You can replace the file contents with the following code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Replace the file contents with the following code:
```

          <img src={viteLogo} className="logo" alt="Vite logo" />
        </a>
        <a href="https://react.dev" target="_blank">
          <img src={reactLogo} className="logo react" alt="React logo" />
        </a>
      </div>
      <h1>Vite + React</h1>
      <div className="card">
        <button
          onClick={() => setCount((count) => count + 1)}
          aria-label="increment"
        >
          count is {count}
        </button>
        <p>
          Edit <code>src/App.tsx</code> and save to test HMR
        </p>
      </div>
      <div className="card">
        <button
          onClick={() => {
            fetch('/api/')
              .then((res) => res.json() as Promise<{ name: string }>)
              .then((data) => setName(data.name))
          }}
          aria-label="get name"
        >
          Name from API is: {name}
        </button>
        <p>
          Edit <code>api/index.ts</code> to change the name
        </p>
      </div>
      <p className="read-the-docs">
        Click on the Vite and React logos to learn more
      </p>
    </>
  )
}

export default App
```

Now, if you click the button, it will display 'Name from API is: Cloudflare'.

> Let's have a look at hot module reloading in action.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

> Increment the counter to update the application state in the browser.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can see hot module reloading in action by Incrementing the counter to update the application state in the browser.
```

Next, edit `api/index.ts` by changing the `name` it returns to `'Cloudflare Workers'`.
If you now click the button again, it will display the new `name` while preserving the previously set counter value!
With Vite and the Cloudflare plugin, you can iterate on the client and server parts of your app quickly without losing UI state between edits.

#### Build your application

Run `vite build` to build your application.

If you inspect the `dist` directory, you will see that it contains two subdirectories: `client` and `cloudflare-vite-tutorial`.
The `cloudflare-vite-tutorial` directory contains your Worker code and the output `wrangler.json` configuration.

#### Preview your application

Run `vite preview` to validate that your application runs as expected.
This command will run your build output locally in the Workers runtime, closely matching its behaviour in production.

#### Deploy to Cloudflare

Run `npm exec wrangler deploy` to deploy your application to Cloudflare.
This command will automatically use the output `wrangler.json` that was included in the build output.

> ### Next steps

Reviewer 4: Maybe change to something more specific like "After deployment" to make more scannable?

  An optional path to your Worker config file.
  By default, a `wrangler.toml`, `wrangler.json` or `wrangler.jsonc` file in the root of your application will be used as the Worker config.

- `viteEnvironment?: { name?: string }`

  Optional Vite environment options.
  By default, the environment name is the Worker name with `-` characters replaced with `_`.
  Setting the name here will override this.

- `persistState?: boolean | { path: string }`

  An optional override for state persistence.
  By default, state is persisted to `.wrangler/state` in a `v3` subdirectory.
  A custom `path` can be provided or, alternatively, persistence can be disabled by setting the value to `false`.

- `auxiliaryWorkers?: Array<AuxiliaryWorkerConfig>`

  An optional array of auxiliary workers.
  You can use [service bindings](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/runtime-apis/bindings/service-bindings/) to call auxiliary workers from your main (entry) Worker.
  All requests are routed through your entry Worker.
  During the build, each Worker is output to a separate subdirectory of `dist`.

> [!NOTE]
> When running `wrangler deploy`, only your main (entry) Worker will be deployed.

> > If using multiple Workers, it is your responsibility to deploy them individually.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> If using multiple Workers, each must be deployed individually.
```
The "your responsibility" just sounded kind of intense to me.

> You can inspect the `dist` directory and then run `wrangler deploy -c path-to-worker-output-config` for each.

### `interface AuxiliaryWorkerConfig`

- `configPath: string`

  A required path to your Worker config file.

- `viteEnvironment?: { name?: string }`

  Optional Vite environment options.
  By default, the environment name is the Worker name with `-` characters replaced with `_`.
  Setting the name here will override this.

## Migrating from `wrangler dev`

> Migrating from `wrangler dev` is straightforward and you can follow the instructions in the [Quick Start](#quick-start) to get started.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Migrating from `wrangler dev` is a simple process and you can follow the instructions in the [Quick Start](#quick-start) to get started.
```
Sounded too casual to me

There are a few key differences to highlight:

### Input and output Worker config files

In the Vite integration, your Worker config file (e.g. `wrangler.toml`) is the input configuration and a separate output configuration is created as part of the build.
This output file is a snapshot of your configuration at the time of the build and is modified to reference your build artifacts.
It is the configuration that is used for preview and deployment.

### Redundant fields in the Wrangler config file

There are various options in the Worker config file that are ignored when using Vite, as they are either no longer applicable or are replaced by Vite equivalents.

> If these options are provided then warnings will be printed to the console with suggestions for how to proceed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If these options are provided, then warnings will be printed to the console with suggestions for how to proceed.
```

  A custom `path` can be provided or, alternatively, persistence can be disabled by setting the value to `false`.

- `auxiliaryWorkers?: Array<AuxiliaryWorkerConfig>`

  An optional array of auxiliary workers.
  You can use [service bindings](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/runtime-apis/bindings/service-bindings/) to call auxiliary workers from your main (entry) Worker.
  All requests are routed through your entry Worker.
  During the build, each Worker is output to a separate subdirectory of `dist`.

> [!NOTE]
> When running `wrangler deploy`, only your main (entry) Worker will be deployed.
> If using multiple Workers, each must be deployed individually.
> You can inspect the `dist` directory and then run `wrangler deploy -c path-to-worker-output-config` for each.

### `interface AuxiliaryWorkerConfig`

- `configPath: string`

  A required path to your Worker config file.

- `viteEnvironment?: { name?: string }`

  Optional Vite environment options.
  By default, the environment name is the Worker name with `-` characters replaced with `_`.
  Setting the name here will override this.

## Worker environments

> A Worker config file may contain configuration for multiple [environments](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/wrangler/environments/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Worker config file may contain configuration for multiple [Wrangler environments](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/wrangler/environments/).
```

Reviewer 2: or possibly

```suggestion
A Worker config file may contain configuration for multiple [Cloudflare environments](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/wrangler/environments/).
```

Reviewer 2: Oh I see below that you use the term "Worker environment" - so perhaps that would be best here.

Author: I've updated it to 'Worker environments'. Let me know if you would rather I use the term 'Cloudflare environments' throughout the readme though. I'm not sure which is better.

With the Cloudflare Vite plugin, you select an environment at dev or build time by providing the `CLOUDFLARE_ENV` environment variable.
Consider the following example `wrangler.toml` file:

```toml
# wrangler.toml

name = "my-worker"
compatibility_date = "2024-12-30"
main = "./src/index.ts"

vars = { MY_VAR = "Top-level var" }

[env.staging]
vars = { MY_VAR = "Staging var" }

[env.production]
vars = { MY_VAR = "Production var" }
```

> If you run `CLOUDFLARE_ENV=production vite build` then the output `wrangler.json` file generated by the build will be a flattened configuration for the 'production' environment.

Reviewer 3: We does this only specify `vite build` without any mention of `vite dev`?

Author: I couldn't find a way of including both without it becoming overly long and confusing (there's no output `wrangler.json` in dev for example). I have called out either side of this paragraph that it can be applied at dev and build time. I can have another think.

Reviewer 3: yeah I can see that you did mention "dev or build time", maybe that's good enough? 🤔 

In any case I'm fine with the current paragraph, we can always improve it later if needed

Author: I've added an additional paragraph - [886873f](https://github.com/flarelabs-net/vite-plugin-cloudflare/pull/119/commits/886873f6fa7528620dc5cdc83d64ef689a18a5ae).

This combines [top-level only](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/wrangler/configuration/#top-level-only-keys), [inheritable](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/wrangler/configuration/#inheritable-keys), and [non-inheritable](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/wrangler/configuration/#non-inheritable-keys) keys.
The value of `MY_VAR` will therefore be `'Production var'`.

> The name of the Worker will be `'my-worker-production'`
> This is because the environment name is automatically appended to the top-level Worker name.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The name of the Worker will be `'my-worker-production'`, this is because the environment name is automatically appended to the top-level Worker name.
```

Author: Sorry, there was supposed to be a full stop. A comma doesn't work grammatically.

```suggestion
The name of the Worker will be `'my-worker-production'`.
This is because the environment name is automatically appended to the top-level Worker name.
```

> This is because the environment name is automatically appended to the top-level Worker name.

Reviewer 2: Is there a docs page we could link to that explains this? I think not but if there is...

Author: It's only mentioned in this 'Configuration' section - https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/wrangler/environments/#configuration.

Reviewer 2: It's pretty minimal. Let's leave it for now

> [!NOTE]
> The default Vite environment name for a Worker is always the top-level name.
> This enables you to reference the Worker consistently in your Vite config when using multiple environments.

Running `vite dev` or `vite build` without providing `CLOUDFLARE_ENV` will use the default top-level environment.
The value of `MY_VAR` will therefore be `'Top-level var'`.

> As Worker environments are applied at dev and build time, specifying `CLOUDFLARE_ENV` when running `vite preview` or `wrangler deploy` will have no effect.

Reviewer 2: Feels like this should be called out in a `!NOTE` block?

Author: There's already a `!NOTE` block directly above so it felt a bit weird having them next to each other. Any suggestions?

Author: I've fixed this by adding an additional paragraph in between - [886873f](https://github.com/flarelabs-net/vite-plugin-cloudflare/pull/119/commits/886873f6fa7528620dc5cdc83d64ef689a18a5ae).

Let me know if that's OK.

### Combining Worker environments and Vite modes

You may wish to combine the concepts of [Worker environments](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/wrangler/environments/) and [Vite modes](https://vite.dev/guide/env-and-mode.html#modes).
With this approach, the mode can be used to select the environment and a single method can be used to determine environment specific configuration and code.
Consider again the previous example:

```toml
# wrangler.toml

name = "my-worker"
compatibility_date = "2024-12-30"
main = "./src/index.ts"

vars = { MY_VAR = "Top-level var" }

[env.staging]
vars = { MY_VAR = "Staging var" }

[env.production]
vars = { MY_VAR = "Production var" }
```

Next, provide `.env.staging` and `.env.production` files:

```sh
# .env.staging

CLOUDFLARE_ENV=staging
```

```sh
# .env.production

CLOUDFLARE_ENV=production
```

> Now, if you run `vite build`, the 'production' mode will be used by default and the 'production' environment will be selected.

Reviewer 2: I think this could be more explicit, especially for people who don't understand modes and environments.

Perhaps along the lines of:

```suggestion
By default the `vite build`, uses the 'production' mode. Vite will therefore load the `.env.production` file to get environment variables to be used in the build. Since the `.env.production` file contains `CLOUDFLARE_ENV=production` the Cloudflare Vite plugin will select the 'production' Worker environment configuration.
```

Author: [e0d0a21](https://github.com/flarelabs-net/vite-plugin-cloudflare/pull/119/commits/e0d0a2124631758d957adc445e01201ed29832a8)
